docs/source/scxml-jani-conversion.rst, before:

SCXML to Jani Conversion
========================

SCXML and Jani
----------------

In CONVINCE, we expect developers to use Behavior Trees and SCXML to model the different parts of a robotic systems.

SCXML (Scope XML) is an high level format that describes a single state machine, and allows it to exchange information with other state machines using events. Each SCXML file defines its variables (datamodel), states and transitions.

With SCXML, the system consists of a set of state machines, each one represented by a SCXML file, that are synchronized together using events. Operations are carried out when a state machine receives an event, enters a state, or exits a state.

With Jani, the whole system is contained in a single JSON file, consisting of a set of global variables, automata (equivalent to state machines) with their edges (equivalent to transitions), and a composition description, describing how Automata should be synchronized by the mean of advancing specific edges at the same time.

The main difference between SCXML and Jani is that in Jani there is no concept of events, so synchronization must be achieved using the global variables and composition description.

High-Level (ROS) SCXML Implementation
---------------------------------------

In CONVINCE, we extended the standard SCXML format defined `here <https://www.w3.org/TR/scxml/>`_ with ROS specific features, to make it easier for ROS developers to model ROS-based systems.

In this guide we will refer to the extended SCXML format as High-Level SCXML and the standard SCXML format as Low-Level SCXML.

Currently, the supported ROS-features are:
* ROS Topics
* ROS Timers (Rate-callbacks)

TODO: Example of Topic and Timer declaration + usage.

Low-Level SCXML Conversion
----------------------------

Low-Level SCXML is the standard SCXML format defined `here <https://www.w3.org/TR/scxml/>`_.

Our converter is able to convert High-Level SCXML to Low-Level SCXML by translating the ROS specific features to standard SCXML features.
In case of timers, we need additional information that cannot be encoded in SCXML, so that information is generated at runtime.

The conversion between the two SCXML formats is implemented in ScxmlRoot.as_plain_scxml(). TODO: Link to API.

TODO: Describe how we translate the High-Level SCXML to the Low-Level SCXML.

TODO: Timers are useful for SCAN as well: instead of keeping them in a runtime object, we can consider to list them in an intermediary xml file.

Jani Conversion
----------------

Once the Low-Level SCXML is obtained, we can use it together with the timers information in the conversion to a Jani model.

.. _simple_overview:

Simple Overview
________________

The following picture gives a simple overview of how our conversion works:

.. image:: graphics/scxml_to_jani.drawio.svg
    :alt: Conversion process
    :align: center

The core of the conversion lies in the translation of the SCXML state machines to Jani automata and the handling of the synchronization between them.
In the example above, we have two SCXML state machines, BatteryDrainer and BatteryManager, that are synchronized using the event "level".

At start, the BatteryDrainer state machine sends a "level" event out, containing the current battery level in the "data" field.
In Jani, this translates to an edge, i.e. "level_on_send", that advances the BatteryDrainer automaton to a next state where the sending action is carried out and, at the same time, assigns a global variable corresponding to the event parameter, i.e. "level.data", and another edge with the same name that advances an additional automaton "level_sync" from the "wait" to the "received" state, signaling that an event "level" was sent out and needs to be processed.

The BatteryManager automaton has an edge "level_on_receive", that can now be triggered since the "level_sync" automaton is in the "received" state. When executing the edge, the BatteryManager automaton assigns the global variable "battery_alarm" based on the data contained in the "level.data" variable and goes back to the same state, waiting for the next "level" event. Similarly, the "level_sync" automaton transitions back to the "wait" state using the edge "level_on_receive".

The BatteryDrainer can execute the edge "battery_drainer_act_0" and transition back to the initial state either before or after the "level_on_receive" action, as there is no constraint enforcing a specific order of execution.

It is important to notice that the level_sync automaton enforces the "level_on_receive" action to be execute before "level_on_send" can be executed again: this is to make sure the event is processed before sending the next event.

Though the approach described here works as it is in many cases, there are specific configurations that require special handling and will be discussed in the section :ref:`Handling events<handling_events>`.

In the next sections we are going to describe in more detail how specific parts of the SCXML to Jani conversion are carried out.

Handling onentry, onexit and conditions
________________________________________

TODO

.. image:: graphics/scxml_to_jani_entry_exit_if.drawio.svg
    :alt: How execution blocks and conditions are translated
    :align: center

.. _handling_events:

Handling events
________________

In section :ref:`Simple Overview<simple_overview>` we introduced the basic concept of how events are handled in the conversion from SCXML to Jani.
That concept works for the simplest cases, but there are more complex scenarios where problems may occur, and require special handling.

In order to understand possible problematic scenarios, let's consider the following example:

.. image:: graphics/scxml_to_jani_events_handling_pt1.drawio.svg
    :alt: SCXML events with possible deadlocks
    :align: center

In this example there are two state machines that are sending `event_a` and `event_b` out and one state machine receiving them.
The first state machine sends `event_a` out at each loop, the second state machine sends `event_a` twice and `event_b` once before starting again and the third state machine receives `event_a` and `event_b` in alternating order.

If we use the event_sync automaton strategy as exemplified in the :ref:`Simple Overview<simple_overview>`, i.e., we make an automaton for synching `event_a` and one for synching `event_b` without any further handling, we will reach a deadlock situation where the `event_a` is waiting to be processed by the receiver before being able to send out `event_b`, but the receiver is waiting for `event_b` to be available before processing `event_a`.

In order to overcome such situation, we need to introduce a mechanism that allows a receiver to discard an event it is not expecting, such that the senders are allowed to continue their execution.
This is achieved by tracking all events that an automaton can receive during its execution and, for each one of its states, introducing a self loop transition processing the events that aren't explicitly handled. 

An additional thing to keep in mind during the conversion, is the synchronization of the senders: if both senders are in a state where they can send out `event_a`, it is important that only one of them does it at a time: this will result in having one line for each automaton sending a specific event in the Jani composition table.

The Jani model resulting from applying the conversion strategies we just described is the following:

.. image:: graphics/scxml_to_jani_events_handling_pt2.drawio.svg
    :alt: Handling SCXML events preventing deadlocks in Jani
    :align: center

It can be noticed how new self loop edges are added in the `A_B_receiver` automaton (the dashed ones) and how the `ev_a_on_send` is now duplicated in the Composition table, one advancing the `A sender` automaton and the other advancing the `A_B sender` automaton.


Handling of (ROS) Timers
__________________________

TODO

Handling of (ROS) Services
_____________________________

TODO

ROS services, as well as ROS topics, can be handled directly in the ROS to Plain SCXML conversion, without the need of adding Jani-specific features, as for the ROS Timers.

The main structure of the generated Jani models can be seen in the diagram below:

.. image:: graphics/ros_service_to_scxml.drawio.svg
    :alt: Handling of ROS Services
    :align: center

The automata of clients and service are converted directly from the existing ROS-SCXML files, while the "Extra Service Handler" one, is autogenerated starting from the provided clients and services.

Commit message:

Prepare features before integration week (#26)
* Add support to BT Input Ports

Signed-off-by: Marco Lampacrescia <marco.lampacrescia@de.bosch.com>
Signed-off-by: Christian Henkel <christian.henkel2@de.bosch.com>

* Implement scxml action interface. No conversion to Jani yet

Signed-off-by: Marco Lampacrescia <marco.lampacrescia@de.bosch.com>

* Add array support in scxml and jani

Signed-off-by: Marco Lampacrescia <marco.lampacrescia@de.bosch.com>

* Complete action implementation with fibonacci test with one and two threads

Signed-off-by: Marco Lampacrescia <marco.lampacrescia@de.bosch.com>

* Update basic ROS example

Signed-off-by: Marco Lampacrescia <marco.lampacrescia@de.bosch.com>

* Introduce robot controller example, fixing issues with real numbers

Signed-off-by: Marco Lampacrescia <marco.lampacrescia@de.bosch.com>

---------

Signed-off-by: Marco Lampacrescia <marco.lampacrescia@de.bosch.com>
Signed-off-by: Christian Henkel <christian.henkel2@de.bosch.com>

docs/source/scxml-jani-conversion.rst, after:

SCXML to Jani Conversion
========================

SCXML and Jani
----------------

In CONVINCE, we expect developers to use Behavior Trees and SCXML to model the different parts of a robotic systems.

SCXML (Scope XML) is an high level format that describes a single state machine, and allows it to exchange information with other state machines using events. Each SCXML file defines its variables (datamodel), states and transitions.

With SCXML, the system consists of a set of state machines, each one represented by a SCXML file, that are synchronized together using events. Operations are carried out when a state machine receives an event, enters a state, or exits a state.

With Jani, the whole system is contained in a single JSON file, consisting of a set of global variables, automata (equivalent to state machines) with their edges (equivalent to transitions), and a composition description, describing how Automata should be synchronized by the mean of advancing specific edges at the same time.

The main difference between SCXML and Jani is that in Jani there is no concept of events, so synchronization must be achieved using the global variables and composition description.

High-Level (ROS) SCXML Implementation
---------------------------------------

In CONVINCE, we extended the standard SCXML format defined `here <https://www.w3.org/TR/scxml/>`_ with ROS specific features, to make it easier for ROS developers to model ROS-based systems.

In this guide we will refer to the extended SCXML format as High-Level SCXML and the standard SCXML format as Low-Level SCXML.

Currently, the supported ROS-features are:
* ROS Topics
* ROS Timers (Rate-callbacks)

TODO: Example of Topic and Timer declaration + usage.

Low-Level SCXML Conversion
----------------------------

Low-Level SCXML is the standard SCXML format defined `here <https://www.w3.org/TR/scxml/>`_.

Our converter is able to convert High-Level SCXML to Low-Level SCXML by translating the ROS specific features to standard SCXML features.
In case of timers, we need additional information that cannot be encoded in SCXML, so that information is generated at runtime.

The conversion between the two SCXML formats is implemented in ScxmlRoot.as_plain_scxml(). TODO: Link to API.

TODO: Describe how we translate the High-Level SCXML to the Low-Level SCXML.

TODO: Timers are useful for SCAN as well: instead of keeping them in a runtime object, we can consider to list them in an intermediary xml file.

Jani Conversion
----------------

Once the Low-Level SCXML is obtained, we can use it together with the timers information in the conversion to a Jani model.

.. _simple_overview:

Simple Overview
________________

The following picture gives a simple overview of how our conversion works:

.. image:: graphics/scxml_to_jani.drawio.svg
    :alt: Conversion process
    :align: center

The core of the conversion lies in the translation of the SCXML state machines to Jani automata and the handling of the synchronization between them.
In the example above, we have two SCXML state machines, BatteryDrainer and BatteryManager, that are synchronized using the event "level".

At start, the BatteryDrainer state machine sends a "level" event out, containing the current battery level in the "data" field.
In Jani, this translates to an edge, i.e. "level_on_send", that advances the BatteryDrainer automaton to a next state where the sending action is carried out and, at the same time, assigns a global variable corresponding to the event parameter, i.e. "level.data", and another edge with the same name that advances an additional automaton "level_sync" from the "wait" to the "received" state, signaling that an event "level" was sent out and needs to be processed.

The BatteryManager automaton has an edge "level_on_receive", that can now be triggered since the "level_sync" automaton is in the "received" state. When executing the edge, the BatteryManager automaton assigns the global variable "battery_alarm" based on the data contained in the "level.data" variable and goes back to the same state, waiting for the next "level" event. Similarly, the "level_sync" automaton transitions back to the "wait" state using the edge "level_on_receive".

The BatteryDrainer can execute the edge "battery_drainer_act_0" and transition back to the initial state either before or after the "level_on_receive" action, as there is no constraint enforcing a specific order of execution.

It is important to notice that the level_sync automaton enforces the "level_on_receive" action to be execute before "level_on_send" can be executed again: this is to make sure the event is processed before sending the next event.

Though the approach described here works as it is in many cases, there are specific configurations that require special handling and will be discussed in the section :ref:`Handling events<handling_events>`.

In the next sections we are going to describe in more detail how specific parts of the SCXML to Jani conversion are carried out.

Handling onentry, onexit and conditions
________________________________________

TODO

.. image:: graphics/scxml_to_jani_entry_exit_if.drawio.svg
    :alt: How execution blocks and conditions are translated
    :align: center

.. _handling_events:

Handling events
________________

In section :ref:`Simple Overview<simple_overview>` we introduced the basic concept of how events are handled in the conversion from SCXML to Jani.
That concept works for the simplest cases, but there are more complex scenarios where problems may occur, and require special handling.

In order to understand possible problematic scenarios, let's consider the following example:

.. image:: graphics/scxml_to_jani_events_handling_pt1.drawio.svg
    :alt: SCXML events with possible deadlocks
    :align: center

In this example there are two state machines that are sending `event_a` and `event_b` out and one state machine receiving them.
The first state machine sends `event_a` out at each loop, the second state machine sends `event_a` twice and `event_b` once before starting again and the third state machine receives `event_a` and `event_b` in alternating order.

If we use the event_sync automaton strategy as exemplified in the :ref:`Simple Overview<simple_overview>`, i.e., we make an automaton for synching `event_a` and one for synching `event_b` without any further handling, we will reach a deadlock situation where the `event_a` is waiting to be processed by the receiver before being able to send out `event_b`, but the receiver is waiting for `event_b` to be available before processing `event_a`.

In order to overcome such situation, we need to introduce a mechanism that allows a receiver to discard an event it is not expecting, such that the senders are allowed to continue their execution.
This is achieved by tracking all events that an automaton can receive during its execution and, for each one of its states, introducing a self loop transition processing the events that aren't explicitly handled. 

An additional thing to keep in mind during the conversion, is the synchronization of the senders: if both senders are in a state where they can send out `event_a`, it is important that only one of them does it at a time: this will result in having one line for each automaton sending a specific event in the Jani composition table.

The Jani model resulting from applying the conversion strategies we just described is the following:

.. image:: graphics/scxml_to_jani_events_handling_pt2.drawio.svg
    :alt: Handling SCXML events preventing deadlocks in Jani
    :align: center

It can be noticed how new self loop edges are added in the `A_B_receiver` automaton (the dashed ones) and how the `ev_a_on_send` is now duplicated in the Composition table, one advancing the `A sender` automaton and the other advancing the `A_B sender` automaton.


Handling of (ROS) Timers
__________________________

TODO

Handling of (ROS) Services
_____________________________

ROS services, as well as ROS topics, can be handled directly in the ROS to Plain SCXML conversion, without the need of adding Jani-specific features, as for the ROS Timers.

The main structure of the SCXML related state machines can be seen in the diagram below:

.. image:: graphics/ros_service_to_scxml.drawio.svg
    :alt: Handling of ROS Services
    :align: center

The automata of clients and service are converted directly from the existing ROS-SCXML files, while the "Extra Service Handler" one, is autogenerated starting from the provided clients and services.


Handling of (ROS) Actions
_____________________________

ROS actions are handled similarly to ROS Services: a ROS-SCXML description of the system is converted to Plain SCXML, and an additional automaton is generated to handle the synchronization between the clients and the server.

Here the structure of a Client-Server communication through actions and additional threads:

.. image:: graphics/ros_action_to_scxml.drawio.svg
    :alt: Handling of ROS Actions
    :align: center
